The underlying mechanisms that are responsible for the improved room-temperature ductility in Mg-Y alloys compared to pure Mg are investigated by transmission electron microscopy and density functional theory Both methods show a significant decrease in the intrinsic stacking fault I1 energy ( I1 SFE ) with the addition of Y The influence of the SFE on the relative activation of different competing deformation mechanisms ( basal , prismatic , pyramidal slip ) is discussed From this analysis we suggest a key mechanism which explains the transition from primary basal slip in hexagonal close-packed Mg to basal plus pyramidal slip in solid solution Mg-Y alloys This mechanism is characterized by enhanced nucleation of c + a dislocations where the intrinsic stacking fault I1 ( ISF1 ) acts as heterogeneous source for c + a dislocations Possible electronic and geometric reasons for the modification of the SFE by substitutional Y atoms are identified and discussed

While pure Mg and most commercial wrought magne-sium alloys exhibit a low room-temperature ductility(about 5% elongation for pure Mg) the addition of rareearth elements in solid solution causes a significant increasein ductility : Mg and single-phase solid-solution Mg-Y alloys showed an increase in room-temperature duc-tility by about 5 times, while maintaining comparablestrength and well-balanced work hardening, through theaddition of 3 wt.% Y . In order to obtain deeper insightinto the fundamental mechanisms responsible for thissolid-solution driven ductility enhancement, density func-tional theory (DFT) - based methods provide a new toolto quantitatively address possible effects of Y on plasticityin these alloys . Understanding the electronic, magnetic and geometric effects of solutes on crystalline metalsat the atomic scale opens a pathway from our current phe-nomenological descriptive picture towards a more physics-based predictive understanding of the thermodynamic andkinetic properties of metallic materials . Suchan approach is particularly feasible when minor alloy changes ( such as in the case of solid solution Mg-Y ) leadto substantial improvements in the macroscopic behaviour .

In a recent study we showed that the enhancement of themechanical properties of Mg-Y alloys is caused by a facilitated activation of additional deformation mechanismsproviding a+c deformation component , i.e. an out-of-basal-plane  shear  contribution [7] .  Room-temperaturedeformation of pure Mg is limited to mainly basal a slip and 1010 extension twinning [13,14], resulting instrain localization , shear banding and premature failure ofthe material . It was observed that through alloying Y into solid solution the activity off 10gh10 contraction [15] and f10 gf 10g secondary twinning as well as pyramidal c+a slip is much enhanced . It was suggested that secondary twins promote crack nucleation.In contrast, the higher activation of c+a dislocations enables the material to accommodate a higher total strainthrough the higher number of available intrinsic deformation modes and causes a more balanced work hardening. In crystal kinematic terms this means that pyramidalhc+aislip offers five ( or more ) independent slip systemsfulfilling the von Mises condition for general grain defor-mation compatibility , resulting in a more compatibleand hence homogeneous deformation . It was shown in Ref. [7] that neither grain refinement, precipita-tion hardening, shear banding, decreased c/a ratio norchanged Peierls potentials can be responsible for the higheractivity of c+a dislocation slip in Mg-Y. It is therefore important to investigate whether and how the additionof Y changes other materials characteristics that are criticalfor the ductility, such as the stacking fault energies (SFEs) . A modified SFE would also affect the critical resolved shearstresses (CRSSs) associated with competing shear mecha-nisms, and hence would influence their relative contribu-tions to the overall deformation .



